---
title: 'Blog #2: Crafting Arguments'
date: 2025-09-21
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - AI Training 
  - Technology Companies
  - Personal Data
  - Risk
  - Ethics
---

Some thoughts on companies using user's personal data to train their AI.

News Article  
[Your Instagrams are training AI. There’s little you can do about it.](https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/09/08/gmail-instagram-facebook-trains-ai/)

---
The Article's Argument: With the rather recent implementation of AI into apps such as Instagram and Facebook, Meta and other companies are using user's data to train the AI being used within the app. Google is doing this with Gmail, as well. While this feature in Gmail can be turned off, many users are not aware of this feature or of the fact that this feature uses their own personal data. Data being used includes photographs, documents, and conversations with the goal of using it to help AI write and create more like a human. According to the article, "Even worse for your privacy, AI sometimes leaks data back out. Generative AI that’s notoriously hard to control can regurgitate personal info in response to a new, sometimes unforeseen prompt." This is a major risk for users and can seem very scary. It is also what makes it incredibly important for users to understand just what they're giving over to major coorporations when when using apps and platforms. 

The Fallacy: While there are multiple important aspects of the situation that the article forgot to mention, the most important is the idea that users have no clue what they are allowing companies to do. While companies may not explicitly state that personal data is used to train Artificial Intelligence, it is known if a user were to read either the terms and conditions or the privacy policy. The article also failed to point out the many positive outcomes that using personal data to train AI may have for users themselves. These positive features include ease of usability, accesibility, and the seamless transition to including AI within the platform/app to make users have an easier time. 

The Rebuttal: Yes, there are risks involved with companies having access to personal data. However, that has never not been the case. Previously, companies were still using personal ads to determine algorithms and to create personalized and targeted ads. It is important to remember that when signing up for apps like Instagram and/or Facebook, users must go through and accept the terms and conditions. Companies are not hiding these aspects and the features can be turned off. Personal data is not sold to other companies or coorporations and no information that could directly identify you is shared. The Meta Privacy Policy goes in depth to explain how personal data is used and collected. Further, there are risks anytime anything is shared online. To solve this "issue", it is of the upmost importance for users to educate themselves, be aware of the risks, and know how to protect themselves online. 

An Independent Argument: For me personally, I don't side completely with one side or another. I think there is a middle ground. Companies should take ownership and protect their users, they have an ethical duty to uphold because their users trust them. However, users should know that there are risks no matter what and that companies can only do so much. Because of this, educating ourselves as consumers is important and necessary. The responsibility to protect users is on both the user themselves, and the company, of which the users are trusting. Artificial Intelligence is new technology which comes with an unknown impact, companies need to prioritize the users and ensure they are protected and safe all the while, consumers need to do all that they can to stay informed and aware of the impact that could occur due to the companies having their personal data.

Reflection: Overall, I think this assignment really made me consider all aspects of an ethical argument. It pushed me to consider other perspectives, and think more than just what automatically comes to my mind during a first read-through. I think that thinking about what other's perspectives is a valuable skill that is vital to becomming a good programmer, and an ethical programmer, as well. This assignment encouraged me to do think outside of the box and really take the time to consider a difficult situation from all sides, which is something I may not have done otherwise.